---

layout: post
title: 'New release candidate: 1.3.10rc1'
author: foosel
date: 2018-11-06 12:10:00 +0100
card: /assets/img/blog/2018-11/2018-11-06-octoprint-1.3.10rc1-card.png
featuredimage: /assets/img/blog/2018-11/2018-11-06-octoprint-1.3.10rc1-card.png
poster: /assets/img/blog/2018-11/2018-11-06-octoprint-1.3.10rc1-poster.png
excerpt: The first release candidate of the 1.3.10 release, with various
   improvements and bug fixes.
images:
- url: /assets/img/blog/2018-11/2018-11-06-octoprint-1.3.10rc1-pisupport.png
  title: The new warning symbols of the Pi Support plugin when undervoltage and overheating are detected.
- url: /assets/img/blog/2018-11/2018-11-06-octoprint-1.3.10rc1-backup.png
  title: The new Backup & Restore Plugin.
- url: /assets/img/blog/2018-11/2018-11-06-octoprint-1.3.10rc1-appkeys_notification.png
  title: An access request notification generated by the new Application Keys Plugin...
- url: /assets/img/blog/2018-11/2018-11-06-octoprint-1.3.10rc1-appkeys_usersettings.png
  title: ... and the new user settings dialog for management of all your Application Keys.
- url: /assets/img/blog/2018-11/2018-11-06-octoprint-1.3.10rc1-forcedlogin.png
  title: The new ForcedLogin makes sure anonymous users will no longer be able to watch your prints.

---

After quite some time in development, I'm happy to present you the first release candidate of the 1.3.10 release!

[The changelog](https://github.com/foosel/OctoPrint/releases/tag/1.3.10rc1) is on the lengthy side again - don't let 
that scare you though ðŸ˜‰

Here are some highlights from the release notes:

  * The OctoPi Support Plugin is now the Pi Support Plugin, will be enabled when a Raspberry Pi is detected as the underlying hardware platform and report on undervoltage or overheating situations.
  * Added the Backup & Restore Plugin: The new bundled plugin will allow you to make a backup of your OctoPrint settings, files and list of installed plugins, and to restore from such a backup on the same or another instance. This should make migration paths from outdated installations to newer ones easier.
  * Added the Anonymous Usage Tracking Plugin. Tracking will only take place if the plugin is enabled and you've decided to opt-in during initial setup (or enabled it manually afterwards, through the corresponding switch in the settings). The tracking data will give insight into how OctoPrint is used, which versions are running and on what kind of hardware OctoPrint gets installed. You can learn about what will get tracked (if you opt-in) on [tracking.octoprint.org](https://tracking.octoprint.org). Please consider helping development by participating in the anonymous usage tracking â¤ 
  * Added the Application Keys Plugin: The new bundled plugin offers an authorization for third party apps that doesn't involve manually copying API keys or using QR codes. Third party client developers are strongly advised to implement this workflow in their apps. Read more [in the documentation](http://docs.octoprint.org/en/maintenance/bundledplugins/appkeys.html). Thanks to Aldo Hoeben for the idea and initial implementation!
  * Automatic updates in outdated environments are no longer supported. After repeated issues out in the field with ancient installations and ancient underlying Python environments, OctoPrint's Softwareupdate Plugin will no longer allow automatic updates of itself or any installed plugins via the Software Update Plugin if a certain set of minimum versions of Python, `pip` and `setuptools` isn't detected. The current minimum versions reflect the environment found on OctoPi 0.14.0: Python 2.7.9, pip 9.0.1, setuptools 5.5.1. See also the [related FAQ entry](https://faq.octoprint.org/unsupported-python-environment).
  * OctoPrint will now try to protect/educate more prominently against the dangers of opening up OctoPrint on the public internet via various new explicit warnings in the UI as well as a new notification that pops up if you log in from an external IP address. Thanks to the new bundled ForcedLogin Plugin OctoPrint will also no longer be accessible in a read-only way by anonymous guests - to get back the old behaviour, disable the plugin.
  * Added detection of `EMERGENCY_PARSER` firmware capability and if it's present add `M108` to the cancel procedure, to cancel blocking heatups.
  * Improved GCODE analysis speed
  * ... and various further improvements and of course bug fixes.

There's also a small heads-up for plugin authors:

> OctoPrint has updated its `sarge` dependency. The new version 0.1.5 has a small breaking change - the `async` keyword was renamed to `async_` for compatibility reasons with Python 3.7. This might also affect your plugin if you happen to use `sarge` somewhere therein. If so, make sure you to update your plugin to use `async_` instead of `async` (or just use OctoPrint's own `octoprint.util.commandline.CommandlineCaller` class which takes care of this and various other things).
>
> See also [here](https://sarge.readthedocs.io/en/latest/overview.html#id1) for the `sarge` changelog.

You can find the full changelog and release notes as usual [on Github](https://github.com/foosel/OctoPrint/releases/tag/1.3.10rc1).

Special thanks to everyone who contributed to this release candidate, especially @BillyBlaze, @bradcfisher, @eyal0, @fieldOfView, 
@gdombiak, @gerfderp, @hashashin and @tedder for their PRs.

**If you are tracking the "Maintenance RC" release channel**, you should soon get an update notification just like you 
are used to from stable releases.

If you want to help test this release candidate and **aren't yet tracking the "Maintenance RCs" release channel**, you
can find information on how to switch [in this guide](https://discourse.octoprint.org/t/how-to-use-the-release-channels-to-help-test-release-candidates/402)
(also linked below).

**If you are not interested in helping to test release candidates**, just ignore this post, 1.3.10 stable will hit 
your instance via the usual way once reports indicate that it's ready ðŸ˜Š

**Please provide feedback** on this RC. For general feedback you can use 
[this ticket on the tracker](https://github.com/foosel/OctoPrint/issues/2871).
The information that everything works fine for you is also valuable feedback ðŸ˜„ For bug reports please follow
["How to file a bug report"](https://github.com/foosel/OctoPrint/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#how-to-file-a-bug-report).

Depending on how the feedback for this release candidate turns out, I'll either look into releasing 1.3.10 or fix any 
observed regressions and push out a new release candidate ASAP.

### Links

  * [Ticket for general feedback](https://github.com/foosel/OctoPrint/issues/2871)
  * [Changelog and Release Notes](https://github.com/foosel/OctoPrint/releases/tag/1.3.10rc1)
  * [How to use release channels to help test release candidates](https://discourse.octoprint.org/t/how-to-use-the-release-channels-to-help-test-release-candidates/402)
  * [How to file a bug report](https://github.com/foosel/OctoPrint/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md#how-to-file-a-bug-report)
  * [Contribution Guidelines (also relevant for creating bug reports!)](https://github.com/foosel/OctoPrint/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md)
  * [FAQ](https://faq.octoprint.org)
  * [Documentation](http://docs.octoprint.org/)
  * [How to roll back to an earlier release (OctoPi)](https://discourse.octoprint.org/t/how-can-i-revert-to-an-older-version-of-the-octoprint-installation-on-my-octopi-image/205)
  * [How to roll back to an earlier release (manual install)](https://discourse.octoprint.org/t/how-can-i-roll-back-to-an-earlier-version-after-an-update/234)
